---
title: Tempest Alpha 2
description: Tempest alpha 2 is released with auth support, filesystem, and more!
---

It's been three weeks since we released the first alpha version of Tempest, and since then, many people have joined and contributed to the project. It's been great seeing how many people are excited about Tempest, on [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/PHP/comments/1fi2dny/introducing_tempest_the_framework_that_gets_out/), [Twitter](https://x.com/LukeDowning19/status/1836083961174397420), our [Discord](https://tempestphp.com/discord), and on [GitHub](https://github.com/tempestphp/tempest-framework).

Over the past three weeks, we made more than a handful of bug fixes, and added lots of cool features as well! In this blog post, I want to highlight the most prominent things: what's new in Tempest alpha 2!

## Authentication and Authorization

Being able to log in and protect routes is a pretty important feature of any framework. For alpha 2, we've lain the groundwork to build upon: Tempest handles logging in users and checking their permissions with a clean API:

```php
$authenticator->login($user);
```

```php
final readonly class AdminController
{
    #[Get('/admin')]
    #[Allow(UserPermission::ADMIN)]
    public function admin(): Response
    { /* … */ }
}
```

What we haven't focused on yet, is user management — account registration, password resets, etc. We've deliberately left those features in the hand of framework users for now, since we're unsure how we want to handle these kinds of "higher level features". 

The main question is: how opinionated should Tempest be? Should we provide all forms out of the box? How will we allow users to overwrite those? Which frontend stack(s) should we use? This is something we don't yet have an answer for, and would like to hear your feedback on as well.

## New website

There's no missing it: the Tempest website has gotten a great new design. Thanks to [Matt](https://github.com/tempestphp/tempest-docs/pull/20) who put a lot of effort into making something that's much nicer than what I could come up with!

## `str` and `arr` helpers

Next, we've added classes that wrap two of PHP's primitives: `StringHelper` and `ArrayHelper`. In practice though, you'd most likely use their `str()` and `arr()` shorthands.

Ideally, PHP would have built-in object primitives, but while we're waiting for that to ever happen, we wrote our own small wrappers around strings and arrays. Here are a couple of examples:

```php
if(str($path)
    ->trim('/')
    ->afterLast('/')
    ->matches('/\d+-/')
) {
    // …
}
```

```php
$arr
    ->map(fn (string $path) => /* … */ )
    ->filter(fn (string $content) => /* … */)
    ->map(fn (string $content) => /* … */ )
    ->mapTo(BlogPost::class);
```

## Cache

We also added a cache component, which is a small wrapper around PSR-6. All PSR-6 compliant libraries can be plugged in, but we made the user-facing interface much simpler. I was inspired by an [awesome blogpost by Anthony Ferrera](https://blog.ircmaxell.com/2014/10/an-open-letter-to-php-fig.html), which talks about a cleaner approach to PSR-6 — a must-read!

Here's what caching in Tempest looks like in a nutshell:

```php
final readonly class RssController
{
    public function __construct(
        private Cache $cache
    ) {}
    
    public function __invoke(): Response
    {
        $rss = $this->cache->resolve(
            key: 'rss',
            cache: function () {
                return file_get_contents('https://stitcher.io/rss')
            },
            expiresAt: (new DateTimeImmutable())->add(new DateInterval('P1D'))
        )
    }   
}
```

You can read all the details about caching [in the docs](/docs/framework/caching).

## Discovery improvements

Finally, we did a lot of bugfixes for discovery, one of Tempests most powerful features. Besides bugfixes, we've also started making discovery more powerful, 

## Up next

- Filesystem
- Improved route regex support
- Vendor file publishing
- Async commands